(tranquil flute music)
What is a contemplative garden?
A contemplative garden is a place
that allows contemplative mind.
Therefore, it allows for a certain quietness.
It's marked by quietness.
It's marked by balance and harmony.
So it's a place in which
your spirit settles and quiets
so you can contact your true self.
One evening in early August 2005,
I was working in my studio
when my wife Alex came in and said,
"There's a woman on the telephone"
"who has a design emergency."
I said, "Well, my goodness, in all of my years"
"I've never heard of such thing"
"as a garden design emergency,"
but I went to the telephone and it was Anita Northwood
from the Sawtooth Botanical Gardens
in Ketchum in Sun Valley, Idaho.
She said, "I have a design emergency."
I said, "What's the nature of your emergency, madam?"
She said, "His Holiness, the Dalai Lama"
"is coming in September 11th"
"to speak to Sun Valley, Idaho,"
"and with him he's bringing a prayer wheel."
"It's said to be the most beautiful prayer wheel ever made,"
"and it has to be turned by water."
"We've been selected as the site to create a garden"
"to house this prayer wheel."
Originally, I think it was kind of a moving target.
We really didn't know what we were doing.
They told us of the prayer wheel.
I didn't really know what it looked like.
No one did at that point, so the size has been up and down,
and we kind of decided, well the prayer wheel
needs to be in a spot that's conducive
to harmony and peace and quiet.
We're not really always the quietest place
because we are next to a large public transit area.
So what we've done is we have decided--
Martin has decided to build this garden
in an effort to bring tranquility to that particular spot.
(tranquil flute music)
We had six feet of earth to hold up
because we dug a six foot hole.
So to retain six feet of soil
on all sides of this garden in a short time,
rocks were an ideal medium to use.
Rock is speaking of earth itself.
It's the basic guts
and essence of the earth element.
That's a nice stone.
That's prettiest stone I've ever accrued.
I picked up 16 stones because the theme
of the 16 Arhats is the traditional theme
in classical Japanese gardens.
The 16 Arhats were the original students
of the historical Buddha, Shakyamuni.
They are said to have attained enlightenment
in their own lifetime and so they serve as protectors.
So having 16 stones in the garden
protects the truth in that garden,
allows you to experience true innocence
and open-heartedness when you are
in the presence of the prayer wheel.
(tranquil flute music)
The first thing that caught my attention
were these boulders he was gonna be
bringing in from Montana,
from a quarry in Montana.
These huge, beautiful rocks
and the whole concept of these 16 rocks.
My husband and I have spent so much of our lives
in the mountains and rocks for us are just,
they are so solid and serene,
and yet there's some sort of spirit inside the rocks.
When he mentioned those rocks and I saw them
placed in the garden, I thought oh my,
now this is something I really,
this has a connection here.
Obviously the rocks are, for me,
one of the most exciting things.
The size, the magnitude,
how long it takes to place them,
the art of placing them.
It's really neat watching Martin
go through this whole process.
Each stone has it's own particular energy.
You feel it especially when you touch the stone.
There's something that comes from the stone.
It's almost like touching an animal or a human.
You feel a spiritual
energy or quality that relates you to the stone.
You can feel that stone in you,
as though you are that stone.
In the model, you can organize your stones
as you want them to be, but in reality,
once you get the actual stone there,
it goes as it wants to be.
So when you set the first stone,
since all other stones relate to it,
since it goes the way it wants to go,
you have to be very open-minded
to creating the relationship
that really belongs within the character
of the stones that you've selected.
So you're not imposing your own
mental process on the stones.
You're working together with the stones,
like a band almost, a team,
to create the most beautiful organization
that those stones can have inherently.
The hill makes me feel a little bit better.
Makes it stronger.
Yeah, you know.
The first stone really does represent this quality
of the teacher, the mountain, the incarnation
of some kind of divine energy.
The other stones then relate to that central quality
by gesturing toward it or pulling away from it,
or creating a basis that holds it.
You have to be open to the spontaneity
of where the rock wants to be,
and who it wants to be with.
(tranquil flute music)
We knew the prayer wheel,
when it was going to be put here,
they wanted it to be turned by water,
and that was a challenge for us, knowing that.
We didn't know what force of water
we would need to turn the prayer wheel,
but I couldn't make wheelchair access happen
by dropping the pathway more than five feet,
so I dropped the water six feet.
I figured with six foot of fall,
I could turn most anything.
It would design the mechanism
to turn the prayer wheel properly.
So the water entrance is from the north,
and then goes behind this large stone
which is the fundamental stone protecting the north,
and then begins to cascade.
The quality and the feeling of the waterfall,
it's what really invites the presence
of certain kind of deities to come.
(tranquil flute music)
I wanted to get kind of a yin and yang,
an opposition of the qualities of water.
One bright and moving and vibrant,
and the other quiet, serene, reflective, and clear.
(chanting in foreign language)
Water has this wonderful ability where
the top of it can reflect the stone above it,
and the sky can come down into the ground,
and the clouds can be swirling around.
At the same time, you can see
the stone beneath the wave pattern.
If there are fish in it, fish in the mid level.
So water is a lot like the nature of mind.
The contemplative mind is, in many ways,
a purification of ordinary mind.
It is ordinary mind,
minus all of the distracting thoughts
coming from conflicting emotions and thought patterns.
When the mind becomes balanced and harmonious,
the contemplative mind happens,
and that's a purified state of mind,
a pure existence of mind.
Water is what evokes that condition of mind.
(tranquil flute music)
Our message is basically to live in harmony with plants
and the landscape and to use that
in your life without changing it.
A garden doesn't happen until water and stone
combines in balance in proportion with plants.
Look at that water rise, wow!
The shrubs were done in groupings of threes and fives,
and give a rhythm and a progression
to your experience of the garden.
They also establish the basic
structural unity of the garden.
Have you watched a daisy in the morning coming up,
and then watching this,
and then at night bowing its head?
Truly the plant kingdom
is all about the sun.
Plant design is a lot like music,
composition of music.
It exists in the experience
of time and has pattern.
In the upper grove where the thousand people
we talked about wait in benches,
we planted I think 30 aspens.
The aspen trunk, the whiteness of it
feels so alive, so fragile somehow.
(tranquil flute music)
(speaking spanish)
The most important parts
of the prayer wheel itself
is as you come out of the prayer wheel,
and you've had this experience with the prayer wheel,
which is an extraordinary and very special experience,
what do you see?
What you see as you come out of there
is a grouping of five rocks,
and those five rocks have this tree
that just winds around them
and solutes them and becomes
a brother-sister relationship to the rock.
So we take the absolute element of the rock,
the hardness, the unchangeability,
and we interweave it in a very, very intimate way.
This thing that's constantly changing and fragile.
The aspects of plant design is the experience
of the eye as it moves through the garden.
So you take a step and you turn a little bit,
what do you see?
Every time you take a step,
you do want to create a little picture.
That picture might feature a little violet blooming,
or it might be a tree, it might be a rock,
it might be the fall of the water,
but each step creates a new perfect composition.
(tranquil flute music)
I think of the pathway as representing the air element.
The air element is the movement of energy
through the system of the garden.
So it's like the veins of the garden,
or the neurological system of the garden.
It's the way you move through it
and that which connects all things.
She said, "Grandma, let's go down this trail over there,"
and it was just a dusty trail out through the sage brush.
I said, "Sarah, why do you want to go down that path?"
She said, "Grandma, I want to go down that path"
"because I don't know where it leads."
Part of the design of a pathway
in the contemplative garden
has to do with the journey through the garden.
So you're thinking every step, what am I seeing?
Also, what does your body feel like as you're turning?
Is it a jerky turn or is it a smooth and gentle turn?
So designing the pathway has to do with
the way it flirts and separates from the river,
and what you're seeing every step as you're going along.
When you first step into the garden,
you're very much aware of the surroundings
and the mountains around,
but as you go down to the garden,
first you notice the big sister rocks.
That's kind of the threshold that you pass
on the journey to the prayer wheel.
(tranquil flute music)
As you go up, you see in front of you
after a few steps, a hint of the garden building,
and the activity ensues there.
Then you begin to hear the sounds of the people
who are waiting up in the upper area,
and you reintegrate into
the less private and more public world.
I believe that there are a lot of different paths
to find the spiritual center of your life.
It doesn't matter which path you're on
because we're all headed in the same direction.
(tranquil flute music)
Having the prayer wheel will put us
in touch with the wide world,
that our rocks and our beautiful place
will be blessed by having something
that came from another continent,
another part of the world.
So what it's allowed us to do and if we grasp it,
is to get our message out there of what we're about
as a community garden that we started at,
which we evolved now into more of a botanical garden.
What the prayer wheel means to me is
a fellowship in our community.
I think there is a real source of strength
and blessing and healing power in prayer wheels.
The prayer wheel is almost exactly
in the middle of this garden.
That's slightly different than I had in the model.
The reason is because of the wheelchair access.
(tranquil flute music)
They approximately were milled
out of the forest about 100 years ago.
They were used for a grain silo.
That was dismantled, torn apart,
and then the beams were shipped down here,
and then they were resawn.
At the same time,
after about a week and half of the project,
the woodworkers began the construction
of the prayer wheel house.
They decided to build this in the parking lot
because there was just no way to get
so many people down in this small area.
They numbered each of the boards and built it,
and then reassembled it down below.
It's been an interesting evolution.
I can remember the very first evening,
I was here with a couple board members,
and some of the people from Big Wood
looking over the area
that we decided would be
the proper place to put the prayer wheel.
It was just so peaceful and beautiful
with the mountains surrounding that space,
and now it's been transformed
into this very, very special,
magical almost, space
with incredible energy,
but it looks like it's always been there.
So it's interesting that
Martin has designed this garden
in such a way that it's so simple.
I know it was complicated to put together,
but the final product is beautiful and simple,
and it's perfect.
Prayer is opening yourself to something beyond yourself.
Listening as well as being thankful.
Prayer, to me, is a type of meditation.
It's a way of going
inside yourself and finding
a one with the universe, with your God.
Quite often, prayer is
a request or an intention,
or looking for something,
and looking for a miracle,
and wanting something profound.
Meditation, for me, on the other hand,
is getting out of my own way,
and noticing and observing what's right there,
and what's right in front of me.
I think that we all put what are
our prayers or needs and this is irregardless
of any religion or even religious belief.
I think it gives us a place to put those feelings,
and to feel them actually spinning off
in this little field of energy.
(tranquil flute music)
As the Dalai Lama entered
this newly-constructed zen garden in Ketchum,
he first passed by family members,
his brother, niece, and nephew who flew in
from Seattle to see his Holiness.
This project was like being under
the blessed umbrella of his Holiness, the Dalai Lama.
All the relationships had a feeling of serendipity.
Everyone involved was passionately involved.
Inside this brightly-colored drum
are more than a million prayers.
As a flowing stream spins it around,
Buddhists believe those prayers
are released into the universe.
In his native tongue, the Dalai Lama
blessed this wheel by chanting a Tibetan mantra.
When it's blessed by his Holiness,
it gives more meaning for us to go around it
and try to pray for a more compassionate world.
For me it was as though
a switch had been turned on.
There was this fabulously beautiful prayer wheel
turning in the water and then he
gave his blessing to the prayer wheel.
It didn't take very long,
but there was something
that happened that was different.
Right this way.
Whenever the Dalai Lama is in the US,
his family travels to see him
and to expose the next generation
to the spiritual and cultural ways of Buddhism.
My first walk through here with Chris, my wife,
this afternoon and she had seen it before.
Not today and everything like that.
I stood over there at the reflecting pond and looked in.
I'm almost embarrassed to admit,
but I was welling up a little bit.
(tranquil flute music)
Well it really, although I had heard a lot about it,
it really, totally astonished me.
I had no idea it was so magical.
The transition from the outside world
into this place that doesn't have a place.
When I put my hand on the prayer wheel,
it felt like just a light energy,
a lightness of being.
It's gonna be a wonderful place
to come and contemplate and collect oneself,
and share a moment of peace with nature.
Walking around the prayer wheel,
with the hand on the prayer wheel,
that those first change your interior world,
and then they have a greater effect on the world around you,
whether it's just with your little family, your friends,
and the ripples continue to go out from there.
It's kind of exciting because I think
it will take the botanical garden to the next level.
The success of the project depended upon
the complete level of responsibility
and participation of everybody.
We relied on eachother completely.
As a result of that,
we had a unique and wonderful experience,
and I think formed a bond and a friendship
that will last through this lifetime and maybe the next.
(tranquil flute music)